docs/HowToFAQ/Errors.md, before:

---
layout: default
---
<font size="+4"><p style="text-align: center;">Dafny Errors and Warnings</p></font> <!-- PDFOMIT -->


<link rel="stylesheet" href="../assets/main.css">
<link rel="icon" href="../images/dafny-favicon.png" type="image/png">
<link rel="icon" href="../images/dafny-favicon.svg" type="image/svg+xml">

<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>


The title of each section is an error message. This is followed by example code that produces the error,
which is then followed by explanation and references.

Italicized words in the given messages indicate variable content.

# **Command-line Errors and Warnings**

_This section is a work in progress_
<!--  include_relative Errors-CommandLine.md--> 

# **Parser Errors and Warnings**

{% include_relative Errors-Parser.md %}

# **Name and Type Resolution Errors and Warnings**

_This section is a work in progress_

# **Verification Errors**

_This section is a work in progress_

# **Compilation Errors**

_This section is a work in progress_

Commit message:

Copy edits of the Compiler section

docs/HowToFAQ/Errors.md, after:

---
layout: default
---
<font size="+4"><p style="text-align: center;">Dafny Errors and Warnings</p></font> <!-- PDFOMIT -->


<link rel="stylesheet" href="../assets/main.css">
<link rel="icon" href="../images/dafny-favicon.png" type="image/png">
<link rel="icon" href="../images/dafny-favicon.svg" type="image/svg+xml">

<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

This page contains a catalog of the dafny tool's Error and Warning messages,
all in one long page to facilitate searching.

The title of each section is an error message.
Each section contains example code that produces the error,
which is then followed by explanation and references.

Italicized words in the given messages indicate variable content.

# **Command-line Errors and Warnings**

_This section is a work in progress_
<!--  include_relative Errors-CommandLine.md--> 

# **Parser Errors and Warnings**

{% include_relative Errors-Parser.md %}

# **Name and Type Resolution Errors and Warnings**

_This section is a work in progress_

# **Verification Errors**

_This section is a work in progress_

# **Compilation Errors**

{% include_relative Errors-Compiler.md %}
